so yes my name is Greg Udin I'm a
political
philosopher U currently based at
Princeton and uh yes I'm pleased to
introduce Mir canaro who is Professor of
Greek history at the University of
Edinburg and studies helic political
institutions and political
thought and what connects Miro and me I
guess is our shared interest in
democratic theory and Democratic
institutions uh which we will explore
today in in relation to David's essay
Miro many thanks for accepting the
invitation for joining me uh really
great to have you thank you for having
me I'm really pleased to be here and
yeah very
excited yeah well um before we dive in
I'd like to offer a few remarks just to
set the stage for for this
conversation uh some of you might know
me as as niik mentioned as the
translator of David's [__] jobs into
Russian but and and yes I indeed met
David even before that he was a great
inspiration for my own field project on
on Deb we met first time in Cambridge I
guess at a conference on on that but my
primary field is theory of democracy and
uh this piece that will appear in this
edited collection uh as there never was
the West resonated with me for two
reasons first as someone who works on
the history of Concepts uh I've often
thought it would be valuable you know to
write at some point a history of the
most harmful political
Concepts uh the worst of the
worst uh and um the concept of the West
would certainly play a central role in
such a
project uh in fact it might be the
single most harmful idea in contemporary
politics why well because it creates um
false sense of you know self of
homogeneity within this so-called
Western world and simultaneously
exaggerates the differences between the
west and the
rest and this has damaging consequences
particularly in countries like my own
Russia uh where attempts to emulate this
completely
illusory uh Western ideal lead to Total
desperation cynicism nihilism and
rejection of any kind of utopian
Vision David I guess might argue that uh
these failur lead us directly into the
dead zones of
imagination and since we the well the
logic is that since we already tried to
be Western uh and failed we are left
with the temptation to abandon hopes of
imagining and building a better Society
this is uh at least the dominant mindset
in Russia and I guess in many other
places as
well what was the first reason uh and
the second reason why this spech struck
me is because of uh David's criticism of
the hegemonic view of democracy Which
equates democracy with elections or more
generally with majority
voting and indeed I guess uh if you ask
a random person on the street what
democracy means they will likely uh tell
it's about fair and free elections and
if you want more democracy well then
simply let people vote onever you should
direct this is actually a strange View
uh especially when we take the history
of democracy
seriously since Antiquity elections have
been seen as an oligarchic institution
not as a democratic
institution and as Graber concludes
quote the result are not democracies in
any meaningful sense of the world but
republics with a few usually fairly
limited Democratic elements and
quote so this is where they are and now
Graber makes a link between these two
ambitious claims one about the West one
about democracy by questioning the
relevance of the Athenian experience to
democratic
practices he notes correctly I think
that the connection is often drawn
between today's popular vote and ancient
ethens as birthplace of democracy is
largely invented and fundamentally
distorts the Athenian
experience but he also argues and this
to me is a more contentious claim that
Athenian democracy was
majoritarian and that it reflected the
balance of armed
power quote if the vote was 6040
everyone could see the balance of forces
and what would happen if things actually
came to blows every vote was in a real
sense a conquest end quote so is this an
accurate
picture is it true that today's
democracy has nothing to learn from
Athens and uh we should abandon the idea
of reclaiming this
Tradition now there is an ongoing debate
uh among political theorists and
historians about how decisions were
actually made in
Athens
um a very vibrant debate I would say and
Miro is a key figure in this in this
debate uh and I take it that his view of
democracy shares some similarities with
with
gers so mirco
uh at this point I would like to ask you
to tell us what do you think is at stake
in this debate about the relevance of
Athenian democracy what do you think
Graber got right or what he did what did
he get
wrong yeah thank you very much thanks
Greg um yes so I should probably
um so I think greber got a lot of things
right in fact he got he got a lot of
things right about aan democracy that he
did not attribute to aian democracy as a
matter of fact so it is a fact that
Athens has been part of what has
configured itself until the 19th in late
19th century as the Western imagination
but certainly has been part of
U of A European imagination from much
earlier um the interesting thing about
what aens what job aens has done in uh
the building of the kind of Western
political Canon is that for a very very
long time Athens was an anti model
nobody was really kind of using Athens
as a good model M aens was Associated uh
by people that mostly read Plato and
Aristotle with mob Rule and with
everything that is undesirable about
forms of popular control assembly
politics and the like uh certainly the
English speaking word the the main point
of access to aens for a few centuries
was Thomas Hobs um
translation and um oh the sorry the zoom
just asked me to confirm my to my
confirm my speaking language and is's
guessing that it must be Japanese which
means that I'm doing obviously a great
job with my accent
tonight apologies but I have saved
English now so right back here uh okay
um so so aens was certainly a model for
nobody can you hear me now yeah good so
Athens was certainly a model for nobody
um in a funny way much of the
anti-democratic tradition and the
Republican tradition well into the 18th
century and the early 19th century
didn't like aens liked Rome like models
of mixed Constitution um when Aton
started being liked the way he was liked
mainly through the job to the work of
somebody like George Groth and uh the
utilitarian circles in England was more
or less by neutralizing at least to some
extent its more antagonistic
uh drives aens became kind of a pacified
anted for modern parliamentary
democracies and that's the way aens
became what some have called a uh model
for democa democracy as a uray world and
even to this day therefore Athenian
democracy is considered to be different
from Modern democracy in very specific
respects because it's
direct because people don't have at
least most of the time Representatives
but apart from that there is this line
drone so aens is majoritarian aens is
Elite controlled aens as a political
class uh Athens has some kind of
centralized
institution in a funny way I think
Athens itself has been the victim of
this assimilation within Western
tradition uh
if you look at aens we I I'll talk very
quickly about a few things that perhaps
people don't know so if you look at the
evidence for Rons um when people talk
about it it is no surprise to know that
the Athenians
voted they voted in the assembly uh of
course aan assembly was was a very big
Affair uh there were in every session
there were at least 6,000 people present
out of a citizen population of adult
males of course uh of in between 60 and
30,000 depending on periods of its
history anyway at least 6,000 were
present uh we know there was debate but
at some point they had to vote the
interesting thing is that if you look at
histories of voting aens everybody
refers to one vote to make the argument
about majority rule which was the vote
in the famous meinian debate to uh first
to enslave uh to kill man as enslave
Women and Children of a recalcitrant lie
and then the next day with a split vote
right in the middle they revoked the
decision they had made now the funny
thing is that that is the
only majoritarian decision recorded for
Ean assembly in the whole of its record
we have plenty of other uh decisions
recorded and they are all
unanimous uh not only that these this is
true across the board people concentrate
on aens but Greek democracy was a much
bigger Affair than aens uh the Greek
word are at the turn of the 4th Century
had something in the region of
1,500 po city states by the end of the
4th Century BC most of these cities the
vast majority was democratically
governed that is there was no although
there were uh slaves and women did not
participate
uh there was no census exclusion no
barrier in terms of soci economic uh
background and you they had Sovereign
assemblies in which everybody could
speak up and talk now we have H hundred
well we have thousands of inscriptions
of decisions of these assemblies tens of
thousands and we have hundreds of
inscription that
report the outcome of
votes
now I tabulated this stuff and over 95%
of the decision attested by these
inscriptions are uh
unanimous and those that are not
unanimous as a matter of fact are uh
almost unanimous I think the lower they
the more split they get is something
like
8020 so that's kind of the empirical
stuff and I I read the um I read David
graber's essay
the famous essay I think I read it first
in in 2013 when it was translated into
Italian uh and it resonated with me
because I had although I'm a bit younger
perhaps I had similar experience in the
alternative globalization movement uh
and uh and and in occupi and I kind of
got a similar experience of consensual
deliberative assemblies or form of
democratic politics and that's kind of
why I started looking into this stuff
and I was a bit surprised by what I was
Finding and when I read the essay kind
of I thought huh you see perhaps aens
has been kind of badly served by being
assimilated to some extent into this
Western tradition whereas in fact in
fact
is perhaps the best attested and one of
the biggest we'll talk about size later
example of the kind of democratic
politics that that greber discusses and
is discussing even now um I could I
could go on about this there are many
more things one other point that I would
like to make and that just to kind of uh
like Dem mythologize the moment of the
vote in uh in in Greek cities in Greek
democracies in general I would just kind
of make a point which is a small
philological Point uh if you look at
decrees from Athens and from another
thousand of cities from the Greek world
the standard formula that they use for a
decision of the people of the assembly
is this formula that is in Greek is De
th to demo which is always translated as
it has been decided by the demos but
technically it means it has come to be
the opinion of the Demus and it's got a
processual element to it and one thing
we we know is that the Athenians did not
vote on a lot of stuff all the time what
they did was on any given issue they
would talk it to death and usually when
they did come to a vote that was on one
single proposal even if there could be
more that was the one proposal on which
they had essentially already kind of
agreed through sustained discussion and
so on once they had come to the opinion
that uh
facilitators as we would call them today
that were selected by lot and they were
commoners essentially um we can talk
later about how come the commoners could
just kind of run assemblies with 6,000
people that's another element that I
think is quite interesting uh when they
felt that an agreement had been reached
that a consensus had formed which wasn't
pure consensus in aasian sense it was
something more contextual more
negotiated more living in actual
politics it was thought a compromise or
whatever that's when a particular
proposal will be put to the vote and
also there was a very strong uh uh there
was a very strong institutional Iz kind
of power of veto anybody could raise his
hand and say I think this is illegal I
veto this and then it couldn't be
approved and it would take months for
this to be assessed by a low court so H
just to point out that aan democracy has
is a bit different from the way
histories of uh
democracy painted
sometimes yeah thank you yeah um so
there was a question from from niik
about uh melanian dialogue that that you
you mentioned the famous famous case I
think uh yes St has already attached um
a link I think we will need to attach a
link to to the recording of this video
just to make it clear for for the
viewers um so um well I will probably
have a couple of more questions and then
we will turn to to
Q&A uh so basically what you say means
that this 640 uh example that that David
provides is uh quite a rare uh case in
Athenian democracy that that just simply
didn't work like that yeah there wasn't
I mean that was actually I don't think
there is a 6040 case there is a 50% plus
one and then there are all 100% against
nobody uh even the decision on the
famous Sicilian Expedition which was uh
preceded we know was preceded by one of
the most contentious debates in in in
the history of democracy that lasted
ages and people argues against each
other to death ended up with a unanimous
vote okay so that's important but now
you mentioned this this concepts of of
consensus and clearly there were
institutions that were working towards
like building this consensus before the
vote so um and Graber also clearly
resists the the the idea that democracy
is simply a majority imposing its will
on minority mhm uh at one point he
formulates his own ideal of democratic
legitimacy in this ESS say uh I quote
the point is to ensure that no one walks
away feeling that their views have been
totally ignored and therefore that even
those who think their group came to a
bad decision are willing to offer their
passive
acquist so that sounds quite hegelian to
me Freedom as compliance with
self-imposed limitations yes uh now my
question how does this ideal work in a
situation of intense class conflict yeah
uh how consensus can be compatible with
with those sharp class
divisions uh because the Athens was
clearly a class based society they were
they were classes and one definition of
democracy of Athenian democracy is
actually the rule of the poor where
where deos uh means means the poor a
regime where the poor sort of
systematically dominate the rich yeah
sounds good uh to to us uh poor but uh
the rich will probably uh feel a little
bit
oppressed uh so should we as Democrats
aim for a classless society or how does
that work in a class-based
society yeah
um yeah I mean I should say that like
one of the reasons for
which okay
I'll there is like that's another kind
of element of tension modern narratives
of aan democracy
now if you ask most Scholars of aan
democracy and most political theorist uh
of a pro-democratic leaning what does
democa means and what specifically means
H deos deos means in the word democa
they would tell you that it means the
totality of the citizens of the people
and not a class-based group and in fact
by and large the I wouldn't say the
Orthodoxy but the most widespread
opinion about this is that there are
two opposing definition of democa in
ancient sources one of them is the
Democratic one which is democracy is the
power of all of the demos as all and the
other is the anti-democratic one the one
by the Elites for whom democracy is the
power of the poor and then you got
Aristotle said says something like
Aristotle uh democracy is the power of
all but of course if everybody as an
equal say because the poor are more
numerous than is the power of the poor
is which is his kind of way to do to say
I think that also is a bit of a
misunderstanding in a funny way
like you can see a lot of kind of uh
Democratic discourse particularly in
certain inscriptions in certain test
text that does oscillate between the
demons being old and the demons being
the masses the poor in fact we could
even say the working classes because uh
the elite definition of what the demon
of of what the demons was was the poor
were what the poor were was those that
had to work for a living so that the
working uh uh element was really the
central one uh
now the impression you get and I get to
the problem about class class read in
society and about ensus and how that
works is
that in Athenian democracy you find that
there is at various point and certainly
in the fifth and fourth Century
something of a of an
neonic popular discourse and even kind
of an eonic popular C popular culture
the the forms that are institutionalized
are fundamentally those of the common
people uh which means that cultural
forms that are more associated with the
elite are normally considered
extra official and potentially
subversive even like the kind of place
where these people meet together and go
for a drink at some point gets outlawed
because it's the kind of place where
they think about how to overturn the
Democracy know H which means that rich
people can belong to the demos to the
extent that more or less they align
themselves with the demos and with this
kind of aimon and also to the extent
that they don't protest to being taxed
squeezed to a very considerable extent
uh in aens the only form of direct
taxation that existed uh was uh only on
the top 4% richest people in the city
nobody else paid direct taxes um and uh
so so and this is where for example I
think uh
uh David Graver in the way he talks
about consensus which is kind of which
comes from experience of of of political
activism and of of actual practice get
something that must talk about consensus
and The Liberation in the liberative
Democracy the theory democratic theory
uh doesn't quite get
uh deliberative
theorist tend to get terrified by
any potential for conformity
coming out of the Liberation towards
consensus now the reality is that in
these kind of assembly cultures like the
Athenian
one there was always a balance being
struck B with between sustain debate in
which everybody had to say their thing
and in fact there was also kind of a
normative expectation that somebody
would play Devil's Advocate and the fact
that at the end of the
day if you were losing out and there was
a consensus forming it was kind of bad
form just keep going in your own way
you're kind of that was not really done
uh even the kind of the vote vote by uh
that's in the anarchist tradition that's
kind of a very typical argument made but
in aens all votes on political decision
were made by show ofan so they were open
vote an open vote as certain features
that come uh with it towards consensus
mainly the fact that open vote is not
necessarily
simultaneous which means that when you
call for a vote you can look around and
see where it's going and see what your
uncle is voting and what that guy and
what your neighbor is voting and all
that kind of thing and you can have some
kind of
causal influence on one
another and also so I think to a certain
extent uh deliberation towards consensus
in aan democracy like in many of these
kind of communities on the one hand that
creates community that can be and can
try to be cohesive behind certain measur
but on the other hand does try to avoid
extreme forms of uh of desense or and
the fact is that in a context of aian
democracy and in a context of these
cities uh one of the normative value
that they always talk about they even
divinize it at certain point point is uh
is for is the value of Omonia which
means consensus means thinking the same
thing or thinking similarly now omona is
usually opposed to stasis to civil
Strife to Civil War and the fact is that
in this community there was a certain
kind of uh fear that the division of the
vote if repeated over time would turn
into the division of civil strife and of
people starting to kill each other so
I think uh to a certain extent
consensual and deliberative practices as
they were embedded uh and became part of
kind of of a deliberative and consensual
ethos of how these institutions were
meant to work also serve to create a
requirement for a certain level of
Conformity from certain
Elites uh they had to show that they
were part of the deos and that they
align themselves and we have examples of
that we have kind of elite politicians
that go that speak for for hour against
something but when they see they lose
they even move from the you as the
pronoun to us and they kind of embrace
the decision and then start arguing
about okay how we're going to do this
well like we see that working in
practice in the debates we know
of interesting yeah it's uh I mean there
something that is which which is missing
for me in in this account of democracy
that gra provides in this particular
essay is is of course the the the
concept of stasis uh the idea of
agonistic competition not simply
building a consensus but engaging into
an agonistic competition that's why I'm
asking about the the class divisions
because it's just difficult for me to
imagine uh you know this democracy this
is something actually that the Graber
himself criticizes uh this democracy of
uh University professors yeah who
believe that uh democracy works like a
an academic seminar uh whereas in
reality of course there is a lot of room
for
uh for active engagement and conflict uh
so I'll probably ask um two more
questions and and then we will
definitely asking for relatively short
answers and then we'll move on to to Q&A
already see uh people have uh questions
to ask so I I I wonder what do you make
of of graber's
methodology uh in this essay He suggests
that uh quote one can write the history
of democracy two very different ways
either one can write a history of the
war democracy beginning with ancient
Athens or one can write a history of the
sort of egalitarian decision-making
procedures that in Athens came to be
referred to as Democratic so that is of
course his General approach that he
applies also to other phenomena uh most
notably he speaks of the states where
many historians of modernity would
consider it
anachronistic uh like 5,000 years ago um
and well for instance castoriadis uh who
was of course the theorist of radical
democracy and one of graver's main
Inspirations in this essay Castor
strongly believed that we should follow
the concept and he criticized
contemporary liberal democracies for not
leaving up to the ideals of ainan
democracy what do you think about
graber's approach here
yeah yeah I you know one thing that
always puzzled me a bit about the ESS
and at some point I will actually do
some research on that specifically is
that he makes the argument that the need
by Elites that were invested in a
Republican and fundamentally state-based
and larian form of of
governance to start calling their regime
democracy was originating from
below because democracy was something
people were were talking about and I've
always kind of wondered and of course it
was also based on wider practices that
were emerging in certain places but I
think kind of that's those slly
different things I mean yeah of course
there were practices but he also makes
the point in the Democracy project he's
got this wonderful paragraph in which he
points out and that's actually correct
that in the 18th century in the early
19th century before the the American
Republic started being called U uh a
democracy uh to talk about somebody
that's Democratic was mainly to talk
about somebody that would talk back to
people in authority to about Traders and
Craftsmen and uh and uh and Farmers that
would dare to speak to the social better
as they were equal and stuff like that
no and this is the sense that then
forces them to kind of adopt the name
but of course the name is a Greek
name and I've always kind of wondered
like where did the where did the farmers
get get it from I mean yeah they got it
from a variety of places they got a
sense of their own rights and a sense of
different for Del Liberation but why did
they kind of went to democa where is the
classical reception element there if
it's not Elite based where they adopting
or appropriating something that they saw
being used against them on a daily basis
to talk about what the regime should not
become and that in turn force them so I
think that's that's I mean that's an
interesting question I do in a certain
sense I I am in fact
uh more comfortable I am quite
comfortable with graber's approach to
the extent that he he says we should
talk about different kinds of communal
governments governance or to this kind
of uh of democracy just kind of as a
form of deciding things together and
being together regardless of following
the word itself and I think you could
make a good argument for aan democracy
to
have a nice place into that kind of
narrative as an example of that and in
fact it would still have a remarkable
place because he has the big advantage
of being well of having enormous
evidence
base mhm it's very well attested and
Greek democracy even more we're talking
about kind of I mean that's why I like
that's why I'm a Greek historian I mean
the word of the Greek city states is
this this this wonderful sunbox of
1,500 independent autonomous cities most
of which at some point became Democratic
which tried things out like and most of
these places are very well attested we
have inscriptions we have writing from
these people we can follow them over 5
to 600 years quite well so for premodern
societies that's almost unparalleled so
it will still have a place in that kind
of narrative and in fact like for a big
chunk of the most famous period of uh of
Athenian
democracy the argument could be made
that nobody was calling in democracy
even in Greece
they were calling it something else so
even like even the history of Athan
democracy is not exactly the history of
that word it only becomes the history of
that word after a while at the same time
though I do think there is a certain
kind of paradoxical potential uh in
using the Western democracy
narrative and this connection with
Athens and the link with this kind of
word against itself precisely because so
much stock has been put into this
particular experiment as an anent uh if
it can be shown and proven that this was
not quite as they made it out to be but
in fact is closer
to occupy was sweet assem or the
zapatista movement in certain ways like
from a rhetorical political and even
ideological point of view that has a
certain strength uh we talk within a
tradition and we talk with people that
are within that tradition so even from
that point of view I think and democracy
can be quite useful I think to us if we
can use uh these approaches to
challenge
dominant Western continuity ideal and to
shake this stuff up uh all histories of
democracy start with aens so what if
aens was nothing like they make it out
to
be what happens to the rest yeah so we
have a lot to learn from from Greek uh
from Greeks not only Athenians even by
by gra standards okay uh well that that
brings me to my last question I guess um
that goes back to graber's point about
the non-existence of the
West uh I fin interesting that Graber uh
decided to make this argument through
the lens of
democracy because he could very well
have chosen many other Concepts uh but
he chose to challenge the connection
between democracy and the West do you
believe that the fate of democracy is
tied to the concept of the West one
reason I'm asking this among others is
because if you listen closely to someone
like uh the American
president-elect Trump uh he almost never
speaks of the
West uh probably he read his Graber I
don't know um so he probably doesn't see
much in common between the us and what
would we call the rest of the
West uh
um we will see of course if he indeed
tries to dismantle the institutions of
the so-called West uh but my question is
do you think that would be good for
democracy could actually help
reinvigorating if there's actually you
know sort of decline Decay like force
decay of the West could it help
reinvigorating the Democratic project
with more substantive democratic
practices and principles yeah um yeah
that's interesting I funny thing is that
like I was saying that I first read this
essay in Italian translation and in
Italian trans Italian translation is
actually called CRI democracy oal so a
critique of Western democracy so there
still the west but it's not like right
there like as if it's h
but but yeah I I do I do feel okay so
you kind of we moving from kind of area
expertise to kind of
opinion I do feel that identification of
certain con context of uh
anti-authoritarian governance from the
law with a certain tradition whether
it's correct or not which is the Western
one is a very kind of comfortable way
for uh for for people to just cut
themselves out I think if you are
genuinely Democratic U it the same
happens if you think about kind of
concept like the the rights of man or
human rights and stuff like
that Western Enthusiast in that this is
a distinctly Western concept and then uh
you get like you get I don't know the
Chinese government that has been
insisting for for for 30 years that
therefore this stuff is Western is a
form of Western imperialism and uh and
we don't care about the stuff because
it's being imposed and then you've got
other people that say well all
communities formulate
claims and formulate their own concept
of Rights there's nothing particularly
Western about this so I I do think that
even kind of strategically if you
believe something I think when you when
we talk about this concept democracy or
or rights and so on as specifically
Western uh what we are trying to defend
is the west and not democracy or or
rights and I think if we really care
about democracy or rights and all this
kind of stuff uh we all to gain to China
disentangling it with what is a
problematic concept and
also a very specific kind of tradition
that has a lot of problems with it and
has been associated with a form of
imperialism and colonialism and the like
I so yeah I I do kind of like Graber
steak and I think I'm quite pleased that
even in my discipline which is long been
kind of at the very basis of Western
Civilization courses and stuff like that
we are starting to problematize that
stuff
because doesn't help
anybody good thank you uh so yeah I see
people are looking for like more uh
close discussion of of the text and we
welcome of course the the questions were
like specific uh about specific
paragraphs of the text clearly we cannot
cover it I mean it's that's a huge and
very rich text we cannot cover it in in
60 minutes but uh your your questions
are very welcome uh please um so I see
Michael's hand but then there will there
was a question on the chat from from
naika uh so first Michael then then
naika um yes so I just want want to
comment on uh maybe some of the
Practical issues in
democracy um and obviously like from the
vast variety of David's writings he
raises this issue of what we kind of
call democracy many people didn't
necessarily use this word which is after
all a Greek word but even in um the
discussions of um by David gber and
David wenro about ancient cities they
speculate about democracy and then cross
that with modern anthropology to say
what is it if you are not if you have a
group of people that are live together
and work together and they need to
create common things like water food all
these kinds of things or entertainment
um they have to and but they don't have
coercion right there's no coercion that
says right we're going to make a
decision and once the decisions made if
you don't disag if you don't agree we're
going to coers you into it then what the
have is we're going to work together so
they have to build a collective decision
together this is particularly true of
small communities David talks about it
in his uh ethnography of um uh
Madagascar people in
Madagascar um that they they've got to
come up with a decision yeah and it's
actually really a practical issue
consensus is a practical issue that if
you create a situation where half of the
people are are really pissed off and
don't like it where you create a
situation like in parliamentary
procedure where this is my motion and I
am going to win this motion and push the
other team out right that's all fine for
a group of Elites who are going to then
order someone else to do their work but
if you're all going to do it together
the worst thing you want is to have the
common task have 50 49% of the people
say well [__] off I'm not going to do it
then right that kind of practical issue
of consensus so it doesn't really just
surprise me that ancient Greece has a
lot of this well we're not going to have
a lot of coercion so the Practical issue
is we pretty much got to come up with an
agreement and maybe if you have this
large scale democracy at this scale they
actually did voting remember David
Graber kind of claimed that most real
democracy was about debate there wasn't
and coming to a consensus um but voting
was really what you did in a military
group because if you had a argument in a
military group and people were going to
go to the sword you kind of could put it
to a vote and say well look there's more
of them we're we going to lose so we'll
just go with what it is and that will be
our decision so those kind of Dynamics
and then of course the entire argument
of Graber seems to be more about the
myth of democracy the myth of the West
being associated with democracy um and
and this is is in some way is what I
think is maybe
missing this but I was really excited to
hear the empirical kind of take on
Ancient um Athens and I and and it's
it's always interesting to say when you
take a theory and the person that made
the theory doesn't have all the
empirical details later some of these
empirical details come out will that
theory work and I think when you start
to look at the details of um how it is
that consist ensus is described in some
ways David Graber is really arguing
democracy is a bit of a scam but we need
politically to use that word because if
you say you're anti-democratic within
the West people just don't know how to
deal with that right um so uh remember
who was it um the um kind of Joseph Sher
as an economist said democracy was the
key form of decisionmaking for
capitalism because you pretty much
needed that of consensus decision to for
to for the the nation to decide which um
economic leaders were going to make the
political decisions it still wasn't like
what we would call a bottomup democracy
um the capitalist democracy and that's
kind of where maybe we need more
thinking about the myth of the West as
that capitalist democracy is the same
thing as the ideal of democracy that
somehow is still still connected to
ancient Greece but was also present in
countries all over the world some of
them before written history yeah yeah
thanks Michael uh Miro I got anything to
yeah just yeah just to say that like
just point about the point about about
coercion and about uh the military group
yes for example that's like that's one
thing that uh that's one thing that I
don't entirely buy about about the essay
I mean I don't bu about aens but also I
don't entirely buy that kind of
Distinction uh uh I mean first of all
like in most Greek cities which is the
main model he uses for this kind of
stuff people did not bear arms in
assemblies and had not been done for
Centuries by The Classical period uh and
uh but also paradoxically uh he at some
point mentions the anabasis of xenophone
and kind of an
army uh
voting as a kind of in a democratic way
the funny thing about about the the
example of that assembly is a group of
Greeks mercenary that find themselves
stuck in in Anatolia in in the middle of
turkey uh because their the Persian
Pretender that they were trying to
support uh is being killed so they have
no job to do and they try to get back
they have no chain of command whatsoever
they come from a variety of different
cities they are soldiers of course and
what they do to make decisions they
start basically doing what they did at
home they start running an assembly and
making decisions and in fact the
decisions they make are consensual
they're not majoritarian SS or not they
just decide that they would at home um
and just another small Point another
thing that I find interesting is that
uh in most kind of smaller assembly as
Graber says of course you wouldn't vote
at all uh the interesting thing is that
also in the Greek word and that's kind
of often lost like there was a level of
deliberation and of decision making in
smaller Community smaller group that was
fundamentally like similar to what he's
talking about H and that's where people
were socializing knowing how to run even
bigger assemblies what is interesting
and distinctive is of course that this
is a big place and they managed to scale
it up all the way to Assemblies of
thousands and thousands of people uh
but in know that we could talk about
that for ages I mean like how much
stateness you're allowed before you lose
this stuff you you can no longer do that
and that goes together with a kind of
debate about this kind of politics how
much stateness they had uh but but yeah
that I thought that was excellent point
yeah thank you thank you uh so NAA had a
point I N I wonder if you would like
to uh to ask the question or let me uh
just read
it um yeah I don't know it's yeah okay
you you can read it yeah the so the I I
read it now the key question is what
decisions need to be made together and
what decisions can be left to the people
how the whole system of power societ is
organized uh it means facility curiosity
over decision making because the finite
set of choices of decision making is
unmoving us so keep so to say keeping us
from us so the the the key question is
uh what are the decisions to
be uh left to if if I get it correctly
what are the decisions to be left
to uh this um yeah maybe itive maybe
yeah collec decision making mechanism
and what are the what are the others
that don't need
that get correct I I will yeah maybe I
will formulate it myself I think uh
Michael uh I will continue the what
Michael was asking so if uh David's
experience in um uh occupying this
assembly so people were assembling
because they were doing the direct
action so you either participate or you
walk away consensus is a natural thing
to do you know there is no police who
will force you to uh you know to to go
to the protest movements but uh uh in
Greece there was like a slavery Society
you know the cities were fighting with
each other so when we talk about this
specific
example uh what what this assembly was
about it reflect the whole structure uh
and there is was other societies that
describe and don't of everything in
Madagascar for example When government
uh walk away uh and then the people
decided about their daily life uh and
then in this case the consensus exactly
uh the only tool that would be
implemented so that's I think the
crucial question about democracy how we
use
it yeah gosh um yeah thank you for that
um Okay so
I think I mean the thing I find striking
and that's kind of a slight so even in
the dawn of everything in the big kind
of 60 pages chapter about these kind of
forms that he reconstructs uh what you
do have there is that a lot of the
communi society is talking about still
kind of have an ingroup and an outg
group and uh that is the problem about
many of this traditional society and it
was certainly the problem with that is
that these kind of decision making
processes were essentially egalitarian
open even people from different soci
economic groups and so on but also they
were still limited to the members of the
in group and they were people that were
not part of the in group and people were
made decisions were made for them uh
so like the problem the problem with
with the Greek word and Greek cities and
with this kind of premodern society in
some cases and not in others but
certainly in the Greek one is of course
slaves and women uh and then the
question you need to ask is whether uh
you
think the form of decision making that
they implemented was possible only
because they had slaves that has been an
argument that has been made these people
were people with Leisure because the
slaves were working with for them they
were not most most of these people work
side by side with the slaves but still
that's kind of a long-standing argument
no h in a sense David graber's work
shows that in fact these kind of models
of decision making are not dependent
on people being out but still there is
the problem of the exclusion the
question that you were asking about what
decision need to be made uh by consensus
I mean like uh I mean the experience in
the alternative globalization movement
and that's what kind of what David gra
RIS many time is that not everything has
to be decided Community communitarian by
consensus there are a lot of things that
people can just do and there are a lot
of things that small community can just
do and I think that's true across the
board including including in Athens
Athens has village community has got de
has got private Association all of them
make their own decision people can
basically do everything that is not
forbidden that's the extent the extent
to that's what we're talking about here
um
so these kind of decision making
processes do not entail the fact that
there is a totalizing need for the
community to express a shared opinion
about everything
the community expresses a shared opinion
on whatever the community thinks they
need to express a shared opinion but on
most things they
don't and people just do their own thing
uh so I think that would be the short
answer yeah that's important point just
because the the obsession with voting uh
leads us often to ask the questions that
not worth to be asked uh stuss uh would
be next and probably the the last
question I don't know if we have time
for more stats
please hi hello so um I wanted to take
us into de zones of imagination back but
I would like to make it as as concrete
as possible so I'll start a little bit
nebulous uh when David writes his
accounts of kayapo society he notes that
there is a practice uh called Mo uh
exists in many societies M when you
always uh live in a society which has
two political groups every complete
Society has to have two political groups
highest level of division and there is
certain institutions based around that
uh how you resolve conflicts and so on
but at the same time
uh all the actively existing societies
which uh declare themselves to be mo
societies don't do Mo properly uh they
say that it is ideal form this is how
properly constituted Society should work
Village tribe whatever but uh for some
reason we don't do it properly because
we can't work out some conflicts and so
on so this is one angle uh that is we
have um Imagination about properly
constituted society and the actually uh
existing thing on the ground uh which is
different uh and it is uh trying
to it holds this Ideal Image as
something to
judge itself uh as being more or less
Pro
appropriate um so when Mira points out
that uh a Athenian Society isn't really
uh majoritarian Society for most of the
case but we still do have majoritarian
decisions and in our history in our
imagination it absolutely is
majoritarian society are we uh seeing
the same kind of divide as a uh ideal
proper form of organization and uh
contingent uh active uh form that should
properly be uh striving towards ideal
and as a more concrete realization of uh
this
divide uh there are there are political
projects one of them is uh Richard wolf
uh but it's not specifically right it's
a wider
argument a political project
to to mobilize people uh
to demand democracy
at a workplace by showing that well why
is it you you demand uh one person one
vote democracy on a state level but you
accept one share one vote democracy on a
work in a workplace why don't you demand
the same kind of democracy and this
seems to be an effective tool in
mobilizing people so even though it it
doesn't even work in the
in what is held up is a mirror but still
our imagination is effective in
mobilizing it are we actually imagin
that a proper Society should be
majoritarian one that's a
question okay so
right so the question I guess is on the
one hand if this kind of model of
consensus reached in various Society
including the Athenian one was just kind
of an ideal and then if majority if the
fact that majority still happen well I
mean not just majority happened I mean
civil Strife
happened
uh like the the interesting thing to me
to this extent I mean I see that Nika
just wrote there on the uh on the chat I
would like to find a way to make
decisions by consensus in communities
larger than 30 people I think to an
extent that's precisely why I think
place like is interesting because this
is a place that most of the time managed
to make decision by consensus among 30
people among 100 people among 500 people
and among 6,000 people and 8,000 people
and they did kind of consistently not
all the time and sometime they even the
community broke down and and they they
killed each other but over a period of a
few centuries most of the time that
worked out uh but then that kind of
backs the question we asking I mean what
kind of level of of of of cohesion a
priori you need to make what kind of
level of cultural homogeneity you need
to make that possible if you don't have
coercion and stuff like that I mean that
was certainly always kind of my
experience as an activist I mean
consensus was all good and well until it
wasn't and of course people at some
point would just leave and and some
people decided that the consensus was
not kind of to their liking and they
would just go away and uh and of course
you couldn't and keep them there but so
I do I I might worry but it's not much
of a worry it's just something that as a
historian because I'm not a theorist
primarily my impression the impression I
always get is that coercion does not
need to be the threat of violence
necessarily but there Reas a certain
level of coercion due to geographical
conditions uh to the fact that you're a
community together and you need a
certain level of cohesion a priority
that is at least some kind of basic
agreement on values on what you're
trying to achieve you need to decide at
least a priority that you are a
community certainly the Greek cities did
they decided we are the demons and that
kind of thing so to go back I mean I I
like my approach to this is very is very
pragmatic I am interested in how to how
they may
do and I do think uh that what uh what
the Greek city brings to this debate in
a way is uh an example of the dynamic
that David has explored so well uh
that still work at a significantly high
level of
complexity even economic complexity and
even high level of kind of social
complexity and class complexity and all
of that uh you don't need to be 30
people around the fire to for that to
work you can be thousands people in in
the commercial hub of the Western
Mediterranean uh in a city that is
incredibly rich and stuff like that and
there still kind of historical example
example of decision being made like
that yeah n says that seems that
majoritarian democracy is only required
when people plan something like war or
direct violence um well I see one one
last hand from Stefanos Mir if you have
just a few minutes uh we can probably
take this last one but please make it
short the kids are are in bed so I
I'm thank all
night I and I think thanks a lot for the
very interesting discussion I I just
wanted to ask something because you're
uh like you're a professor on that field
the the term city state M uh that is
being used I thought that state was like
the carriage of violence and was
introduced by um esos or omiros uh and
not by Aristotle so it's it's like the
city state was a view of uh the most
modern uh like the modern view of the uh
older cities so it's not an accurate
term and I think that also Cornelius
castoriadis wrote extensively about the
use of that term yeah I just want your
opinion on that thanks a lot yeah
there's no there's no ancient word to
mean to mean uh there's no Greek word
certainly to mean State uh they they I
use I I said c State just because I use
it as a stock translation of of poce
because that's how most people met it in
school when they did uh but there is a
debate on the level of stateness I mean
I always kind of I I use police making
an assumption and everybody knows what I
mean when I say polish because it's kind
of the Greek term and is kind of
widespread but I do remember once uh
talking to to to to a group of friends
and activists and I was mentioning the
police and they thought I was talking
about about the police and somebody
shouted at me [__] [__] the police at
some point which I thought fair enough I
think I I I feel like that very often in
my own work but so that was kind of a
way to uh to to use what people may have
heard but uh city state is the stock
translation but is problematic too in
fact people kind of disagree even about
that is he a city state is a citizen
state and they don't problematize the
state part of
it
uh again state is a charge
term in greber because of his Anarchy
perspective and talks about state in a
particular way but of course there have
been kind of theories of stateness that
have a more gradual kind of approach to
levels of institutionalization a
progressive ination that talk about
stateness and statti and this kind of
thing uh what you do certainly have in
this context is urban centers
holding uh countrysides of varing size
uh with very very high level of
institutionalization and formalization
and that's as far as I would go in a way
but and you can call it whatever you
want in a
way interestingly Graber himself
acknowledges that uh Athens uh didn't
have a well-developed
uh statehood uh but that doesn't uh
doesn't really bother him when he uses
the term regarding the even earlier uh
earlier cases but that that to me uh add
some uh some confusion but also makes
the the the anarchist perspective uh
powerful and uh if if you look
backwards well uh thank you so much uh
thank you mirco and uh thanks everyone
uh I once again I didn't expect us to to
cover the the text it is extremely rich
uh and I I think it's already third
discussion on this text and you could
easily do like another 30 and we would
join at least for 15 of them uh and that
wouldn't be enough uh so yeah um let's
keep reading and every time you read
this uh this essay you you you
definitely will find something new thank
you all yeah thank you so much for
coming and I just want to invite you for
a next discussion that will be in
January uh I will just post on the zoom
link not not on the chat so it will be
Michael Hudson uh if you don't know who
is it's a legendary person he is a guy
who originally come up with the concept
of that uh in the way David
rewrote his and use heavily his research
in his book 5,000 years of death and he
will talk about the S calls against
economics and that will be on um January
the 9th uh 8:00 London time last first
first day of the month uh thank you so
much mirco and thank you very much yeah
and hope to see you again uh in Graber
Institute come
along bye-bye thanks